---
layout: post
title:  "It’s not how fast you go, it’s the road you’re on (and its speed limit) that matters... to birds, at least."
date:   2016-12-16
image: road.jpg
---

<p class="intro"><span class="dropcap">Y</span>es, a cheesy facebook-style quote, but it pretty much sums up the paper we looked at this week for our journal club. Understanding how wildlife behaviour adjusts (or doesn’t) to roads and traffic is of huge consequence for conservation efforts aimed at minimising their impact. Although it is known that collision risk varies across species (e.g. more mobile species are better at avoiding collisions) and habitats, whether individuals are able to change their behaviour to reduce collision risk is unknown. This is what Legagneux and Ducatez set out to test in a very neat and concise <a href="http://rsbl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/9/5/20130417?utm_source=HEADS-UP+23-29+AUG+2013&utm_campaign=SMC+Heads-Up&utm_medium=socialshare"> study published in Biology Letters</a>.</p>

The authors measured flight initiation distance (FID) of birds from an approaching car driven at different speeds: over, under and at the road’s speed limit. They did this across several stretches of road encompassing different speed limits, from 20 to 110 km/h. Interestingly, they found that FID was related to road speed limit, but not to the actual speed of the approaching car. This suggests that birds do not assess the speed of each car that drives towards them, but rather have a set escape behaviour depending on the stretch of road they’re on. These results have several fascinating implications. Firstly, by not having to evaluate the speed of each individual car, birds may be optimising the time dedicated to other activities (such as foraging) which they may be engaged in. Secondly, if birds ‘know’ a road’s speed limit, it implies that this is actually a characteristic of that particular habitat (in the same way as predator abundance might be a characteristic of certain habitats). If this is indeed the case, how birds interpret or assess this ‘habitat characteristic’ remains an unanswered question and raises many intriguing ones. It could be that regular traffic helps birds determine average road speeds, but this begs the question of what would happen on quieter roads or how birds which are territorial differ in their assessment from that made by migrants that are passing through. 

There were several aspects we found engaging about this paper. Firstly, the simplicity of the design and data collection is a reminder that good science need not be complicated, require elaborate designs or expensive equipment. The authors have been quoted as saying that the idea for the study was born from being bored whilst driving to and from work and noticing birds flying out of the car’s path. We did wonder about the safety of driving while watching birds, operating a stopwatch, taking notes, and going up to 40km/h over the speed limit (or if part of the funding was allocated to pay speeding fines). Perhaps the more exciting result of reading this study is that it started a discussion of potential spin-off research from this paper, commenting on some of the work that has cited it and discussing ideas for our own research into this topic... It must be good science if it triggers the imagination.

Author: Dario Fernandez-Bellon

Photo credit: <a href="http://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2013/08/20/article-2398231-1B61A041000005DC-172_634x441.jpg">Daily Mail </a>
